zone out no more: mitigating mind wandering during
computerized reading
sidney k. d’mello, caitlin mills, robert bixler, & nigel bosch
university of notre dame
118 haggar hall
notre dame, in 46556, usa
sdmello@nd.edu

abstract
mind wandering, defined as shifts in attention from task-related
processing to task-unrelated thoughts, is a ubiquitous
phenomenon that has a negative influence on performance and
productivity in many contexts, including learning. we propose
that next-generation learning technologies should have some
mechanism to detect and respond to mind wandering in real-time.
towards this end, we developed a technology that automatically
detects mind wandering from eye-gaze during learning from
instructional texts. when mind wandering is detected, the
technology intervenes by posing just-in-time questions and
encouraging re-reading as needed. after multiple rounds of
iterative refinement, we summatively compared the technology to
a yoked-control in an experiment with 104 participants. the key
dependent variable was performance on a post-reading
comprehension assessment. our results suggest that the
technology was successful in correcting comprehension deficits
attributed to mind wandering (d = .47 sigma) under specific
conditions, thereby highlighting the potential to improve learning
by “attending to attention.”

keywords
mind wandering; gaze tracking; student modeling; attentionaware.

1. introduction
despite our best efforts to write a clear and engaging paper,
chances are high that within the next 10 pages you might fall prey
to what is referred to as zoning out, daydreaming, or mind
wandering [45]. despite your best intention to concentrate on our
paper, at some point your attention might drift away to unrelated
thoughts of lunch, childcare, or an upcoming trip. this prediction
is not based on some negative or cynical opinion of the
reader/reviewer (we read and review papers too), but on what is
known about attentional control, vigilance, and concentration
while individuals are engaged in complex comprehension
activities, such as reading for understanding.
one recent study tracked mind wandering of 5,000 individuals
from 83 countries with a smartphone app that prompted people
with thought-probes at random intervals throughout the day [24].
people reported mind wandering for 46.9% of the prompts, which
confirmed lab studies on the pervasiveness of mind wandering
(see [45] for a review). mind wandering is more than merely
incidental; a recent meta-analysis of 88 samples indicated a
negative correlation between mind wandering and performance
across a variety of tasks [34], a correlation which increases with
task complexity. when compounded with its high frequency,
mind wandering can have serious consequences on the
performance and productivity of society at large.

of learning with technology. traditional learning technologies
rely on the assumption that students are attending to the learning
session, although this is not always the case. for example, it has
been estimated that students mind wander approximately 40% of
the time when engaging with online lectures [38], which are an
important component of moocs. some advanced technologies
do aim to detect and respond to affective states like boredom, but
evidence for their effectiveness is still equivocal (see [9] for a
review). further, boredom is related to but not the same as
attention [12]. there are technologies that aim to prevent mind
wandering by engendering a highly immersive learning
experience and have achieved some success in this regard [40,
41]. but what is to be done when attentional focus inevitably
wanes as the session progresses and the novelty of the system and
content fades?
our central thesis is that next-generation learning technologies
should include mechanisms to model and respond to learners’
attention in real-time [8]. such attention-aware technologies can
model various aspects of learner attention (e.g., divided attention,
alternating attention). here, we focus on detecting and mitigating
mind wandering, a quintessential signal of waning engagement.
we situate our work in the context of reading because reading is
a common activity shared across multiple learning technologies,
thereby increasing the generalizability of our results. further,
students mind wander approximately 30% of the time during
computerized reading [44]. and although mind wandering can
facilitate certain cognitive processes like future planning and
divergent thinking [2, 28], it negatively correlates with
comprehension and learning (reviewed in [31, 45]), suggesting
that it is important to address mind wandering during learning.
towards this end, we developed and validated a closed-loop
attention-aware learning technology that combines a machinelearned mind wandering detector with a real-time interpolated
testing and re-study intervention. our attention-aware technology
works as follows. learners read a text on a computer screen using
a self-paced screen-by-screen (also called page-by-page) reading
paradigm. we track eye-gaze during reading using a remote eye
tracker that does not restrict head movements. we focus on eyegaze for mind wandering detection due to decades of research
suggesting a tight coupling between attentional focus and eye
movements during reading [36]. when mind wandering is
detected, the system intervenes in an attempt to redirect
attentional focus and correct any comprehension deficits that
might arise due to mind wandering. the interventions consist of
asking comprehension question on pages where mind wandering
was detected and providing opportunities to re-read based on
learners’ responses. in this paper, we discuss the mind wandering

mind wandering is also unfortunately an under-addressed
problem in education and is yet to be deeply studied in the context

