

103

epistemic network analysis and topic modeling for chat
data from collaborative learning environment
zhiqiang cai

brendan eagan

nia m. dowell

the university of memphis
365 innovation drive, suite 410
memphis, tn, usa

university of wisconsin-madison
1025 west johnson street
madison, wi, usa

the university of memphis
365 innovation drive, suite 410
memphis, tn, usa

zcai@memphis.edu

eaganb@gmail.com

niadowell@gmail.com

james w. pennebaker

david w. shaffer

arthur c. graesser

university of texas-austin
116 inner campus dr stop g6000
austin, tx, usa

university of wisconsin-madison
1025 west johnson street
madison, wi, usa

the university of memphis
365 innovation drive, suite 403
memphis, tn, usa

pennebaker@utexas.edu

dws@education.wisc.edu

art.graesser@gmail.com

abstract
this study investigates a possible way to analyze chat data from
collaborative learning environments using epistemic network
analysis and topic modeling. a 300-topic general topic model
built from tasa (touchstone applied science associates) corpus was used in this study. 300 topic scores for each of the 15,670
utterances in our chat data were computed. seven relevant topics
were selected based on the total document scores. while the aggregated topic scores had some power in predicting students’
learning, using epistemic network analysis enables assessing the
data from a different angle. the results showed that the topic
score based epistemic networks between low gain students and
high gain students were significantly different (𝑡 = 2.00). overall,
the results suggest these two analytical approaches provide complementary information and afford new insights into the processes
related to successful collaborative interactions.

keywords
chat; collaborative learning; topic modeling; epistemic network
analysis

1. introduction
collaborative learning is a special form of learning and interaction
that affords opportunities for groups of students to combine cognitive resources and synchronously or asynchronously participate in
tasks to accomplish shared learning goals [15; 20]. collaborative
learning groups can range from a pair of learners (called a dyad),
to small groups (3-5 learners), to classroom learning (25-35 learners), and more recently large-scale online learning environments
with hundreds or even thousands of students [5; 22]. the collaborative process provides learners with a more efficient learning
experience and improves learners’ collaborative learning skills,
which are critical competencies for students [14]. members in a
team are different in many ways. they have their own experience,
knowledge, skills, and approaches to learning. a student in a col-

laborative learning environment can take other students’ views
and ideas about the information provided in the learning material.
the ideas coming out of the team can then be integrated as a
deeper understanding of the material, or a better solution to a
problem.
traditional collaborative learning occurred in the form of face to
face group discussion or problem solving. as the internet and
learning technologies develop, online collaborative learning environments come out and are playing more and more important
roles. for example, moocs (massive open online courses) have
drawn massive number of learners. learners in moocs are connected by the internet and can easily interact with each other using
various types of tools, such as forums, blogs and social networks
[23]. these digitized environments make it possible to track the
learning processes in collaborative learning environments in
greater detail.
communication is one of the main factors that differentiates collaborative learning from individual learning [4; 6; 9]. as such,
chats from collaborative learning environments provide rich data
that contains information about the dynamics in a learning process. understanding massive chat data from collaborative learning
environments is interesting and challenging. many tools have
been invented and used in chat data analysis, such as liwc (linguistic inquiry and word count) [12], coh-metrix [10], and topic
modeling, just to name a few. epistemic network analysis (ena)
has been playing a unique role in analyzing chat data from epistemic games [18]. ena is rooted in a specific theory of learning:
the epistemic frame theory, in which the collection of skill,
knowledge, identity, value and epistemology (skive) forms an
epistemic frame. a critical theoretical assumption of ena is that
the connections between the elements of epistemic frames are
critical for learning, not their presence in isolation. the online
ena toolkit allows users to analyze chat data by comparing the
connections within the epistemic networks derived from chats.
ena visualization displays the clustering of learners and groups
and the network connections of individual learners and groups.
ena requires coded data which has traditionally relied on hand
coded data sets or classifiers that rely on regular expression mapping. combining topic modeling with ena will provide a new
mode of preparing data sets for analysis using ena.
in this study, we used a combination of topic modeling and ena
to analyze chat data to see if we could detect differences between
the connections made by students with high learning gains versus
students with low learning gains. incorporating topic modeling

